# monkfishCPUE
Standardization models for monkfish fishery catch rates

The American monkfish (_Lophius americanus_) fishery is an economically important component of U.S. commercial fisheries, but uncertainty persists in stock assessments due to uncertainty about the species’ biology and fishery-independent surveys. This study develops standardized catch-per-unit-effort indices for the southern gillnet and northern trawl fleets using statistical models of monkfish catch and effort data. Vessel logbook and at-sea observer data were explored, and the analyses were guided by information from a series of workshops with monkfish fishermen. Their feedback clarified typical fishing practices, described fishery monitoring practices, informed data filtering decisions and the identification of possible standardization factors, and helped interpret trends in catch rates. Standardization models incorporated key factors such as year, month, depth, fishing area, and vessel size to account for their relationships with catch rates and changes in fishing behavior to develop potential stock indices. Diagnostic evaluations indicated that the selected models adequately met statistical assumptions, and comparisons among fishery-independent and fishery-dependent indices suggest that models effectively standardized relative abundance trends. Results from southern gillnet and northern trawl catch rates demonstrate long-term declines from peak catch rates in the early 2000s followed by relatively low catch rates in the 2010s, and moderate to high catch rates since the late 2010s for most indices. These standardized indices can be considered as potential stock indices to support monkfish stock assessment and fishery management. 
